Methyl dragon/type description distribution (#2)
wjwwood/rep: rep-2010.rst

The "transfer function" can be user-defined, or for simple changes (like changing the field type to a compatible type) it can be done automatically.
We already do something like this for the ROS 1 to ROS 2 bridge in order to handle changes between message types in ROS 1 and ROS 2, and something like this was also done for rosbags in ROS 1 with the "bag migration rules" feature.

> Furthermore, the "transfer function" approach also allows for runtime transformation of messages that only change in field semantics (e.g., a change of ``float distance`` to mean centimeters instead of meters, but with no change in field name or type.) Although in those cases, users will likely have to define the transfer function themselves.

Author: ```suggestion
Furthermore, the "transfer function" approach also allows for runtime transformation of messages that only change in field semantics (e.g., a change of ``float distance`` to mean centimeters instead of meters, but with no change in field name or type).
Although in those cases, users will likely have to define the transfer function themselves.
```

.. TODO:: cite the above

This approach requires a few features, like the ability to have a single application read old and new versions of a message at the same time, and it requires more infrastructure and tooling to make it work, but it has the advantage of keeping both the publishing and subscribing code simple, i.e agnostic to the fact that there are other versions of the message, and it keeps the message type from being cluttered with vestigial fields.

Either way, a problem can usually be solved by changing a message in some of, if not all, of the of the above mentioned ways, and is often influenced by what the underlying technology allows for or encourages.
ROS 2 has special considerations on this topic because it can support different serialization technologies, though CDR is the default and most common right now, and those technologies have different capabilities.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

The data structure includes:

- A list of field names and types, but not default values
- The serialization format
- The serialization format version

> - An optional user-defined interface version, or 0 if not provided

Author: ```suggestion
- a list of field names and types, but not default values
- the serialization format
- the serialization format version
- an optional user-defined interface version, or 0 if not provided
```

The resulting data structure is hashed using a standard SHA-1 method, resulting in a standard 160-bit (20-byte) hash value which is also generally known as a "message digest".
This hash is combined with a "type version hash standard version", the first of which will be ``IDLHASH-1``, with an ``@`` symbol, resulting in a complete type version hash like ``IDLHASH-1@<160-bit SHA-1 of data structure>``.
This allows the tooling to know if a hash mismatch is due to a change in this standard (what is being hashed) or due to a difference in the interface types themselves.

> Notably, the user-defined interface version being included in the hash allows for messages that only change in field semantics (i.e., without changing field names or types) to be picked up as discrepancies when they would not before, allowing users to be prompted to write "transfer functions" to resolve them.

Author: ```suggestion
The user-defined interface version makes it possible to change the version of a message that only changed in "field semantics" (i.e. without changing field names or types), and therefore makes it possible to write "transfer functions" to handle semantic-only conversions between versions.
```

.. TODO:: is the list of field names and types sufficient? how to capture things like .idl annotations, etc... I'm thinking of serialization format specific entries can be added to this data structure, but need to sketch it out a bit more

Enforcing Type Version
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> If the type version hash is available, it can be used as an additional constraint to determine if two endpoints (publishers and subscriptions) on a topic should communicate.

Author: ```suggestion
The type version hash can be used as an additional constraint to determine if two endpoints (publishers and subscriptions) on a topic should communicate.
```

When creating a publisher or subscription, the caller normally provides: a topic name, QoS settings, and a topic type.
The topic type is represented as a string and is automatically deduced based on the type given to the create function, e.g. as a template parameter in C++ or the message type as an argument in Python.
For example, creating a publisher for ``std_msgs::msg::String`` in C++, may result in a topic type like ``std_msgs/msg/String``.
All of these items are used by the middleware to determine if two endpoints should communicate or not, and this REP proposes that the type version be added to this list of provided information.

> From the user's perspective, nothing needs to change, as the type version can be extracted based on the topic type given either at the ``rcl`` layer or in the ``rmw`` implementation itself.

Author: ```suggestion
Nothing needs to change from the user's perspective, as the type version can be extracted automatically based on the topic type given, either at the ``rcl`` layer or in the ``rmw`` implementation itself.
```

> Inter-process Type Description Distribution
> -------------------------------------------

Author: Let's drop the "inter-process"

```suggestion
Type Description Distribution
-----------------------------
```

In this use case the type description is used to interpret the serialized data dynamically.

Another use case, which is not covered in this REP, is using the type description in tooling to either display the type description to the user or to include it in recordings like rosbags.

In either case, where the type description comes from doesn't really matter, and so, for example, it could be looked up on the local filesystem or read from a rosbag file.
However, in practice, the correct type description may not be found locally, especially in cases where you have different versions of messages in the same system, either because it's on another computer or perhaps because it is from a different distribution of ROS or was built in a different workspace.

So, it is useful to have a mechanism to convey the type descriptions from the source of the data to other nodes, which we describe here as "type description distribution".
Furthermore, this feature should be agnostic to the underlying middleware and serialization library.

Sending the Type Description
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. TODO:: we should probably decide what the name of that service is somewhere down the line

> Type descriptions will be sent as a response to any query of a dedicated ROS service server (``~/_get_type_description``) that will be started on initialization of each node on either end of a connection (e.g. publishers and/or subscriptions.)

Author: ```suggestion
Type descriptions will be sent as a response to any query of a dedicated ROS service server (``~/_get_type_description``) that will be started on initialization of each node on either end of a connection (e.g. publishers and/or subscriptions).
```

The ROS 2 service type that is meant to define the type description data is intended to be a meta-type description that is able to be used across any potential message types, for any potential serialization schemes used with ROS.
As such, it has to be general enough to account for this.
Such the meta-type description service type would look like:

.. TODO:: We need to confirm this. This is probably very likely to change (e.g. splitting version into 3 numbers for MAJOR, MINOR, PATCH.)

.. code::

    string type_name 
    string version_hash
    ---
    bool available                 # True if the type description information is available and populated in the response 
    string metatype_version        # The version of this metatype descriptor

    string type_description_raw    # The idl or msg file, with comments and whitespace
    string type_description_parsed # The idl or msg file, in a cleaned form that can be fed into type support

    string serialization_library
    string serialization_version

    string type_support_meta       # Human readable metadata for the type support bytestring

>     byte[] type_support            # Implementation specific serialization and deserialization support

Author: ````suggestion
The ROS 2 message that defines the type description must be able to describe any message type, including itself, and since it is describing the message format, it should work independently from any serialization technologies used.
This "meta-type description" message would then be used to communicate the structure of the type as part of the "get type description" service response.
The final form of these interfaces should be found in the reference implementation, but such a Service interface might look like this:

.. code::

    string type_name 
    string version_hash
    ---
    bool successful  # True if the type description information is available and populated in the response 
    string failure_reason  # Empty if 'successful' was true, otherwise contains details on why it failed

    string type_description_raw  # The idl or msg file, with comments and whitespace
    TypeDescription type_description  # The parse type description which can be used programmatically

    string serialization_library
    string serialization_version
    # ... other useful meta data

Again, the final form of these interfaces should be referenced from the reference implementation, but the ``TypeDescription`` message type might look like this:

.. code::

    IndividualTypeDescription type_description
    IndividualTypeDescription[] referenced_type_descriptions

And the ``IndividualTypeDescription`` type:

.. code::

    FIELD_TYPE_INT = 0
    FIELD_TYPE_DOUBLE = 1
    # ... and so on

    uint8_t[] field_types
    string[] field_names

These naive examples of the interfaces just give an idea of the structure but perhaps do not yet consider some other complications like field annotations and more advanced IDL (generically all "interface description languages" not just the OMG-IDL that DDS uses) have.

````

Additional Notes for Type Description Meta-Type

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Author: ```suggestion
Additional Notes for TypeDescription Message Type
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Given that the meta-type description has to be generic enough to support any combination of serialization libraries and formats, there is a high chance that it might need to be changed.
In these cases, there might be a need to add or remove fields on the meta-type description.

> This should be done in such a way that the fields are tick-tocked and deprecated properly.

Author: ```suggestion
Given that the type description message interface has to be generic enough to support anything described in the ROS interfaces, there will be a need to add or remove fields over time in the type description message itself.
This should be done in such a way that the fields are tick-tocked and deprecated properly, possibly by having explicitly named versions of this interface, e.g. ``TypeDescriptionV1`` and ``TypeDescriptionV2`` and so on.
```

> Implementation on the `rcl` Layer

Author: ```suggestion
Implementation in the `rcl` Layer
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The implementation of the type description distribution feature will be made on the ``rcl`` layer as opposed to the ``rmw`` layer to take advantage of the abstraction away from the middleware and to allow for compatibility with the client libraries.

Author: ```suggestion
The implementation of the type description distribution feature will be made in the ``rcl`` layer as opposed to the ``rmw`` layer to take advantage of the abstraction away from the middleware and to allow for compatibility with the client libraries.
```

.. TODO: Confirm the approach.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

A hook will be added to ``rcl_node_init()`` to initialize the type description distribution service with the appropriate ``rcl_service_XXX()`` functions.

> This hook should also initialize an ``std::unordered_map`` of published and subscribed types which will be populated on each initialization of a publisher or subscription in the respective ``rcl_publisher_init()`` and ``rcl_subscription_init()`` function calls.

Author: ```suggestion
This hook should also keep a map of published and subscribed types which will be populated on each initialization of a publisher or subscription in the respective ``rcl_publisher_init()`` and ``rcl_subscription_init()`` function calls.
```

The passed ``rosidl_message_type_support_t`` in the init call can be introspected with getter functions to obtain the relevant information, alongside any new methods added to support type version hashing.

> .. TODO: (CH3) The ``rosidl_message_type_support_t`` contains ``void *`` pointers to the type support library. But I don't think it'll be able to get called if the blob is somehow sent over the air because the object wouldn't be available to call against, I think? Likewise with the function, the symbol name would be available, but a process which doesn't have the type support package won't be able to link against it or call it? I'm a little rusty with the type support pipeline.

Author: ```suggestion
```

We can have non-`void *` stuff in that data structure too, so long as it isn't middleware specific, and things like "get the version hash" or "get the type description as a message" should be rmw agnostic. This may just be the first instance of this.

Inter-process Type Description Distribution
-------------------------------------------

If a mismatch in type hashes is found, the types might still be compatible.
In these cases, the full type description will have to be obtained in order to:

- Confirm type *compatibility* (e.g., the fields are the same, but the version number is different, or fields are implicitly castable)
- Support runtime type *introspection* (even without access to the message package)

> - Support runtime type *transformation* (e.g., splitting, merging, casting, narrowing, renaming, arithmetic ops, etc.)

Author: Type compatibility is actually not the job of ROS (imo), but instead it's something that happens, or does not happen, at the middleware layer. I think it's weird to mention it here. Also, the intro touching on compatibility is misleading I think.

I would say that the main purpose of this feature/section is to provide the description remotely for use in tooling (e.g. something like `ros2 topic info --include-message-definitions ...` or putting the actual definition in a bag file) and to support the runtime type introspection.

Also, the last two bullets are kind of the same thing. The only thing that "runtime transformation" needs to do its job is runtime introspection, so it's more like "runtime transformation" uses "runtime introspection" which needs a description which could be provided by "type description distribution". But there's no direct link between the description distribution and the transformation.

I might suggest a rewording for this intro separate from this comment.

All of these features rely on there being some mechanism to communicate the type description across nodes on the network which might be located on different processes and different machines.

> Furthermore, this feature should be agnostic to the underlying middleware and serialization library.

Author: ```suggestion
For some use cases the type version hash is insufficient and instead the full type description is required.

One of those use cases, which is also described in this REP, is "runtime type introspection", which is the ability to introspect the contents of a message at runtime when the description for that message, or that version of that message, was unavailable at compile time.
In this use case the type description is used to interpret the serialized data dynamically.

Another use case, which is not covered in this REP, is using the type description in tooling to either display the type description to the user or to include it in recordings like rosbags.

In either case, where the type description comes from doesn't really matter, and so, for example, it could be looked up on the local filesystem or read from a rosbag file.
However, in practice, the correct type description may not be found locally, especially in cases where you have different versions of messages in the same system, either because it's on another computer or perhaps because it is from a different distribution of ROS or was built in a different workspace.

So, it is useful to have a mechanism to convey the type descriptions from the source of the data to other nodes, which we describe here as "type description distribution".
Furthermore, this feature should be agnostic to the underlying middleware and serialization library.
```

Sending the Type Description
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. TODO:: we should probably decide what the name of that service is somewhere down the line

> Type descriptions will be sent as a response to any query of a dedicated ROS service server (``/_query_type_description``) that will be started on initialization of each node on either end of a connection (e.g. publishers and/or subscriptions.)

Author: ```suggestion
Type descriptions will be sent as a response to any query of a dedicated ROS service server (``~/_get_type_description``) that will be started on initialization of each node on either end of a connection (e.g. publishers and/or subscriptions.)
```

We definitely want it namespaced by node, thus the `~`.

The name change suggestion is a bit subjective, but to me `query` implies a more complex request, like SQL or something.
The reality is we're getting the type description and even though we specify the version, if we ask for anything but the exact version the node is using it will probably fail to respond.
So I don't see it as a query and we use `get` as the action verb in other places already.

Reviewer: Ah, good catch! I got services confused with parameters, and left out the namespacing

> There will only be one service started per node, independent of the number of publishers or subscriptions on that node.

Author: ```suggestion
There will be a single ROS service per node, regardless of the number of publishers or subscriptions on that node.
```

A service request to this type description service will comprise of the type name and the version hash, which should be obtainable from the endpoint as specified in the previous section.

> Upon receipt of the request, the service server will then construct a response by matching the request against its local list of available types and type hashes, populating the response with the type description and any necessary metadata, and send it. This service calling process is not expected to happen frequently per node, and is likely to only occur per registration of a new publisher or subscription connection, and even then, only if the endpoint type hashes do not match.

Author: ```suggestion
The service server will reply with the type description and any necessary metadata needed to do runtime type introspection.
This service is not expected to be called frequently, and is likely to only occur when new topic or service endpoints are created, and even then, only if the endpoint type hashes do not match.
```

Type Description Contents and Format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The type description response sent by the server will contain a combination of the original ``idl`` or ``msg`` file, and also any necessary information to serialize and deserialize the raw message buffers sent on the topic.

Author: ```suggestion
The response sent by the service server will contain a combination of the original ``idl`` or ``msg`` file's content, as well as any necessary information to serialize and deserialize the raw message buffers sent on the topic.
```

> It should be noted that the section of the response that represents the ``idl`` or ``msg`` file will contain whitespace and comments, as those might be relevant to interpreting the semantic meaning of the message fields.

Author: ```suggestion
The response will contain a version of the description that contains comments from the original type description, as those might be relevant to interpreting the semantic meaning of the message fields.
```

> This information could include the serialization library used, its version, and the associated buffer offsets.
> Or it could even include a shared object that can be dynamically loaded and called against to do the serialization or deserialization, and the name of the symbol to use.

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, the response could include the serialization library used, its version, or any other helpful information from the original producer of the data.
```

TODO

Distributing Type Description via Services, as ``msg`` / ``idl``, on ``rcl``
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sending from Node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The resolution of the ROS graph and subscriptions afford information about what nodes are publishing or subscribing to any message topic.
Furthermore, in order for the nodes to register their publisher or subscription in the first place, they must have access to some version of the corresponding message type locally, even if they might have differing versions of the message type.

> Notably, this guarantees that the node itself will have access to the type description, which removes any need to search for the correct service server when querying for type descriptions—a querying node may simply query the node that is advertising the topic.

Author: This section is very wordy and confusing to me. Maybe we can sit together and work on it. I didn't propose a suggested edit here because I'm unsure about what we're saying here.

> Type Description as Combination Service Response

Author: I'm not sure about this title, do you mean "Type Description as a Combination of Service Responses"? It's not clear to me, but it currently reads as a typo (doesn't make sense to me).

> Type Description as Combination Service Response
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> The contents of the type description response sent by the service server should include information that supports most of the major use cases of this feature (namely, tools and type transformation to allow incompatible nodes to communicate.)
> These use cases have orthogonal interests, with the former requiring human-readable descriptions, and the latter preferring machine-usable descriptions.
> 
> Furthermore, the constraint to have the type description be usable across middlewares and serialization libraries makes it especially important to send at least whatever information is necessary to regenerate the type support for any middleware or serialization library that is used on the receiving end.
> In this case, because the type support pipeline is a lossy process, and there is a need to ensure that enough information is sent to completely reproduce the original msg file from the msg, losslessly, it makes sense to just send the original ``idl`` or ``msg`` file.
> This also makes it important to send sufficient metadata about the serialization library and version used, since the type support pipeline for the serialized message might have changed, and that support information will be useful to resolve the changes.
> 
> Finally, while there could be an argument for sending a losslessly compressed version of the message file, the expected low frequency of queries to the type description service incurs a negligible overhead that heavily reduces the benefit.

Author: ```suggestion
Combining the Raw and Parsed Type Description in the Service Response
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The contents of the "get type description" service response should include information that supports both aforementioned use cases (i.e. tools and runtime type introspection).
These use cases have orthogonal interests, with the former requiring human-readable descriptions, and the latter preferring machine-readable descriptions.

Furthermore, the type description should be useful even across middlewares and serialization libraries and that makes it especially important to send at least the original inputs to the "type support pipeline" (i.e. the process of taking user-defined types and generating all supporting code).
In this case, because the "type support pipeline" is a lossy process, there is a need to ensure that enough information is sent to completely reproduce the original definition of the type, and therefore it makes sense to just send the original ``idl`` or ``msg`` file.

At the same time, it is useful to send information with the original description that makes it easier to process data at the receiving end, as it is often not trivial to get to the "parsed" version of the type description from the original text description.

Finally, while there could be an argument for sending a losslessly compressed version of the message file, the expected low frequency of queries to the type description service incurs a negligible overhead that heavily reduces the benefit.
```

> Using ``rcl`` over ``rmw``
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> While it is true that implementing the type description distribution on the ``rmw`` layer would allow for much lower level optimization (especially on the networking and middleware layers), removing the layer of abstraction means that any potential users of the feature will be required to look into the ``rmw`` layer, and middleware implementations will also need to be aware of this feature.
> 
> Given that the potential gains from optimization will be small due to how infrequently the service is expected to be called, this added development overhead is not a good trade-off.
> It seems much better to have a unified implementation of this feature on ``rcl`` so it is agnostic to any middleware implementations and client libraries, and especially because services are a ROS construct.
> However, the network performance will need to be monitored as this feature is being developed to see if all the extra services (even if they are hidden to the user) will necessitate using ``rmw`` instead of ``rcl``.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
Implementing in ``rcl`` versus ``rmw``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

While it is true that implementing the type description distribution on the ``rmw`` layer would allow for much lower level optimization, removing the layer of abstraction avoids having to implement this feature in each rmw implementation.

Given that the potential gains from optimization will be small due to how infrequently the service is expected to be called, this added development overhead was determined to not be worth it.
Instead the design prefers to have a unified implementation of this feature in ``rcl`` so it is agnostic to any middleware implementations and client libraries.

```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
TODO

> Inter-process Type Description Distribution
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Author: ```suggestion
Type Description Distribution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Other Providers of Type Description
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Several other candidate entities for provisioning the type description were considered but ultimately disregarded for reasons relating to either causing strong dependency on a middleware or a third-party technology, difficulties with resolving the message type description locally, difficulties with finding the correct entity to query, or causing network throughput issues.

Author: ```suggestion
Several other candidate strategies for distributing the type descriptions were considered but ultimately discarded for one or more reasons like: causing a strong dependency on a particular middleware or a third-party technology, difficulties with resolving the message type description locally, difficulties with finding the correct entity to query, or causing network throughput issues.
```

> These are some of the candidates that were considered, and the reasons for rejection:

Author: ```suggestion
These are some of the candidates that were considered, and the reasons for their rejection:
```

- Store the type description as a ROS parameter
   * Causes a mass of parameter event messages being sent at once on init, worsening the network initialization problem
- Store the type description on a centralized node per machine
   * Helps reduce network bandwidth, but makes it non-trivial to find the correct centralized node to query, and introduces issues of resolving the local message package, such as when nodes are started from different sourced workspaces.
- Send type description alongside discovery with middlewares
   * Works very well if supported, but is only supported by some DDS implementations (which support XTypes or some other way to attach discovery metadata), but causes a strong dependency on DDS.
- Send type description using a different network protocol

>    * Introduces additional third-party dependencies separate from ROS and the middleware.

Author: I think we might want to expand on these more in the future, but this is ok for now.

Alternative Type Description Contents and Format
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A combination of the original ``idl`` / ``msg`` file and serialization/deserialization specific objects being sent allows for one to cover the weaknesses of the other.
Specifically, given that certain use-cases (e.g., ``rosbag``) might encounter situations where consumers of a message are using a different middleware or serialization scheme the message was serialized with, it becomes extremely important to send enough information to both reconstruct the type support, and also allow the message fields to be accessed in a human readable fashion to aid in the writing of transfer functions.
As such, it is not a viable option to only send one or the other.

Additionally, the option to add a configuration option to choose what contents to receive from the service server was disregarded due to how infrequently the type description query is expected to be called.

> As for message format, using the ROS service type as opposed to an alternative format like XML, JSON, or something DDS specific like XTypes, allows for greater support with the messaging scheme (ROS services) chosen, and also prevents unnecessary coupling with third-party specifications that could be subject to change.

Author: "something DDS specific like XTypes" doesn't really make sense to me, since that isn't a "format" in itself.

> As for message format, using the ROS service type as opposed to an alternative format like XML, JSON, or something DDS specific like XTypes, allows for greater support with the messaging scheme (ROS services) chosen, and also prevents unnecessary coupling with third-party specifications that could be subject to change.

Author: "something DDS specific like XTypes" doesn't really make sense to me, since that isn't a "format" in itself.
